---
layout: "post"
title: "Privacy nihilism: A measured response"
---

To many young tech idealists data privacy is a sign of digital freedom and autonomy, this portrayal of privacy is often taken as gospel, it can - and often does - result in tin-foil-hat-ery behavior. <!--more--> 

Reddit user nitefuzz posted to r/privacy on august 6th 2019, his post was titled: *I have given up trying to talk to my partner/friends about how their privacy is being abused* ([source][1]). The post seems to echo a popular perspective amongst the community, that privacy is both extremely important to achieve, and at the same time borderline impossible. This leads down a logical path, that one must in some way or another suffer in his path for digital autonomy. This "necessary suffering" manifests differently on separate individuals, some people cope with this tech-nihilism by isolating themselves, some do so with paranoia, some with despair. Nitefuzz however, acts out his own individualized suffering on the people around him. He's a good person, and seems to genuinely worry for his people, but not to the extent of developing empathy or rapport, but to the extend of tribalism - he wants to pressure his partner into the privacy lifestyle.

[1]: https://redd.it/cmrtzn

> I have distinctly noticed that no one else shares my view on privacy. For example, my partner. [...] I have gently introduced her to the world of privacy, by mentioning how our data is collected [...]. I discussed the Cambridge Analytica incident, and the future potential ramifications for our society (e.g. 1984 and what’s happening in China right now). I’ve shown her the privacy subreddit [...], and we even watched the Snowden movie together. After all this, I asked what her thoughts were, and she replied “I don’t care, I have nothing to hide.”
> 
> I probed more and asked if she truly had nothing to hide, then she should give me the login details to her Facebook account. She picked up her phone, unlocked it, and gave it to me saying I could go through it. So, I opened up Facebook, clicked “new post”, and asked her to post her email address and password, and ask her Facebook friends to log in and look through her account. Of course, she said no, and I asked her that if she had nothing to hide, why was she afraid to reveal these private details? She of course could not answer this and changed the topic immediately. Now, whenever I bring up privacy in conversation, she looks at me like I’m wearing a tin foil hat.

R/privacy users regularly discuss what's the best way to combat the "I have nothing to hide" argument, a popular advice is to follow up with a Snowden quote ([who is not exactly a good poster boy for the privacy movement in my eye][2]), the second most common answer usually is a variation of *Well then give me access to your unlocked phone and let me read, copy and save everything!* This gotcha response has been canonized & adopted into the common pool of data privacy knowledge, but it's truly unusual on real life face to face privacy discussions. Popular digital technology discourse outside of niche ultra self fulfilling internet communities surrounds different topics that your average reddit user would lead you to believe, topics like tech addiction, social media disinformation and mental health seem to take primal focus.

[2]: https://mspsocial.net/@lawremipsum/102587000852193789

When the conversation is about Facebook moms poisoning the online information commons and someone joins the conversation to say *you don't care for value X!* the whole room goes silent. China's sutvalence state is messed up & misinformation in the name of vote manipulation *a la* Cambridge Analytica is horrendous, but when the conversation is then re-framed in the light of individual responsibility we enter into the modern privacy-sphere. *It's your fault, you choose the wrong software, the wrong platform, the wrong email provider; you made the wrong choice*. But privacy is unachievable, at least by privacy-sphere standards, because there's always some data breadcrumb, some bit of trust with a foreign or outside entity, you must always stay on your toes, keep up to the latest news and react accordingly. Privacy in this strange way becomes a familiar type of never ending rabbit hole, not because the topic is fundamentally deep, but because there's an underlaying ideology or dogma that self reinforces a set of values and ideas. An ideology set in stone, but once the commandments were written they will self validate, it's a loop.

This set of self fulfilling prophecies can only happen once a change of perspective takes place in an individual's mind: the re-framing to an individualistic view of digital privacy. The community went through a pipeline, the tech utopians as a whole and not only the privacy-heads. In the beginning tech was supposed to end human work and liberate people, everyone would have their website, users would talk and organize a better IRL world now that we have the time thanks to our newly found free time. Tech heavily empathized connection, collaboration & a holistic perspective to real life problem solving, but something happened. Now we're supposed to disconnect, compete and focus on one specific part of the problem at a time to achieve so called digital liberation, look at the trends in tech: off-the-grid tech, competing for likes and hyper local niche internet sub communities as the new norm.

It's all about me-me-me, I will use the right software for my privacy's sake, I will delete Facebook for my own mental health, I will survive the attention drought and become an influencer. [Is this freedom?][3] No! I honestly think this is a form suppression. The game has been set in place

[3]: https://alex-esc.github.io/posts/freedom-is-a-verb.html